



TODO Working Group                                               K. Rose
Internet-Draft                                                J. Holland
Intended status: Standards Track               Akamai Technologies, Inc.
Expires: 14 July 2022                                    10 January 2022


      Security and Privacy Considerations for Multicast Transports
                 draft-krose-multicast-security-latest

Abstract

   Interdomain multicast has unique potential to solve delivery
   scalability for popular content, but it carries a set of security and
   privacy issues that differ from those in unicast delivery.  This
   document analyzes the security threats unique to multicast-based
   delivery for Internet and Web traffic under the Internet and Web
   threat models.

Discussion Venues

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   Discussion of this document takes place on the mailing list (), which
   is archived at .

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/squarooticus/draft-krose-multicast-security.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 14 July 2022.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2022 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
     1.1.  Background
     1.2.  Web Security Model
   2.  Conventions and Definitions
   3.  Multicast Transport Properties
   4.  Threat Model
     4.1.  Authenticity and Integrity
       4.1.1.  Authentication Tagging
       4.1.2.  Beyond Authentication Tagging
     4.2.  Confidentiality
       4.2.1.  Privacy
       4.2.2.  Personal Data
       4.2.3.  Forward Secrecy
     4.3.  Non-linkability
     4.4.  Browser-Specific Threats
       4.4.1.  Access to Local Resources
       4.4.2.  Injection
       4.4.3.  Hostile Origin
   5.  Security Considerations
   6.  IANA Considerations
   7.  References
     7.1.  Normative References
     7.2.  Informative References
   Acknowledgments
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   This document examines the security considerations relevant to the
   use of multicast for scalable one-to-many delivery of application
   traffic over the Internet, along with special considerations for
   multicast delivery to clients constrained by the Web security model.

1.1.  Background

   This document assumes readers have a basic undrestanding of some
   background topics, specifically:

   *  The Internet threat model as defined in Section 3 of [RFC3552].

   *  The Security Considerations for UDP Usage Guidelines as described
      in Section 6 of [RFC8085], since application layer multicast
      traffic is generally carried over UDP.

   *  Source-specific multicast, as described in [RFC4607].  This
      document focuses on interdomain multicast, therefore any-source
      multicast is out of scope in accordance with the deprecation of
      interdomain any-source multicast in [RFC8815].

1.2.  Web Security Model

   The Web security model, while not yet documented authoritatively in a
   single reference, nevertheless strongly influences Web client
   implementations, and has generally been interpreted to require
   certain properties of underlying transports such as:

   *  Confidentiality: A passive observer must not be able to identify
      or access content through simple observation of the bits being
      delivered, up to the limits of metadata privacy (such as traffic
      analysis, peer identity, application/transport/security-layer
      protocol design constraints, etc.).

   *  Authenticity: A receiver must be able to cryptographically verify
      that the delivered content originated from the desired source.

   *  Integrity: A receiver must be able to distinguish between original
      content as sent from the desired source and content modified in
      some way (including through deletion) by an attacker.

   *  Non-linkability: A passive observer must not be able to link a
      single user across multiple devices or a single client roaming
      across multiple networks.

   For unicast transport, TLS [RFC8446] satisfies these requirements,
   therefore Web Transport [webtrans] proposes to require qualifying
   transport protocols to use "TLS or a semantically equivalent security
   protocol".

   For unicast communication this is sensible and meaningful (if
   imprecise) for an engineer with a grounding in security, but it is
   unclear how or whether 'semantic equivalence to TLS' can be directly
   interpreted in any meaningful way for multicast transport protocols.
   This document instead explicitly describes a security and privacy
   threat model for multicast transports in order to extend the Web
   security model to accommodate multicast delivery in a way that fits
   within the spirit of how that model is generally interpreted for
   unicast.

   Although defining the security protections necessary to make
   multicast traffic suitable for Web Transport is a key goal for this
   document, many of the security considerations described here would be
   equally necessary to consider if a higher level multicast transport
   protocol were used for a more specific use case, for delivery to
   clients constrained by the Web security model.

2.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
   14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

3.  Multicast Transport Properties

   By contrast with bidirectional unicast transports, multicast
   transport at the IP or UDP layer is necessarily unidirectional,
   connectionless, and unreliable.

   Although applications compliant with Section 4.1 of [RFC8085] will
   implement congestion control, in the context of a threat model it's
   important to note that malicious clients might attempt to use non-
   compliant subscriptions to multicast traffic as part of a DoS attack
   where possible, and that some applications might not be compliant
   with the recommendations for congestion control implementations.

   TODO: maybe some mention that higher-level protocols can provide
   reliability (e.g. 5740 (norm)/5775 (alc) and/or
   flute(6726)/fcast(6968) that use alc, plus draft-pardue-quic-http-
   mcast), but this may introduce different risks from spoofing if per-
   packet authenticity is not provided.  For example, in an application
   with unicast recovery for a reliable object that's constructed out of
   1k packets, injecting a single spoofed packet amplifies by 1k *
   number of receivers, if they all recover the whole reliable object.
   Also: determine whether this mention belongs in this section--maybe
   better as a ref to a different section here?

4.  Threat Model

4.1.  Authenticity and Integrity

   At its most general, the goal of authentication is to ensure that
   data being processed is genuine, while the goal of integrity
   protection is to ensure that the data is unmodified and complete and
   (where appropriate) to expose any exceptions to applications for
   further handling.  In practice, the mechanisms for these two
   functions overlap to a high degree, so we address them together.

4.1.1.  Authentication Tagging

   In the context of unicast transport security, authentication means
   that content is known to have originated from the trusted peer,
   something that is typically enforced via a cryptographic
   authentication tag:

   *  Symmetric tags, such as symmetric message authentication codes
      (MACs) and authentication tags produced by authenticated
      encryption algorithms.  Because anyone in possession of the keying
      material may produce valid symmetric authentication tags, such
      keying material is typically known to at most two parties: one
      sender and one receiver.  Some algorithms (such as TESLA,
      discussed below) relieve this constraint by imposing some
      different constraint on verification of tagged content.

   *  Asymmetric tags, typically public key cryptosystem signatures.
      These assume that only the sender has access to the signing key,
      but impose no constraints on dissemination of the signature
      verification key.

   In both cases:

   *  The receiving party must have a means for establishing trust in
      the keying material used to verify the authentication tag.

   *  Instead of directly authenticating the protected content, the tag
      may protect a root of trust that itself cryptographically prevents
      modification or forgery of further content.  Examples include:

      -  The TLS 1.3 handshake employing an authentication tag to reject
         MitM attacks against ECDH key agreement.

      -  An authentication tag of a Merkle tree root protecting the
         content represented by the entire tree.

   *  The authentication tag serves to provide integrity protection over
      the unit of content to which the tag applies, with additional
      mechanisms required to detect and/or manage duplication/replay,
      deletion/loss, and reordering.

   Asymmetric verification of content delivered through multicast is
   identical to the unicast case, owing to the asymmetry of access to
   the signing key; but the symmetric MAC case does not directly apply
   given that multiple receivers need access to the same key used for
   both signing and verification, which opens up the possibility of
   forgery by a receiver on-path or with the ability to spoof the
   source.

   Multiple mechanisms providing for reliable asymmetric authentication
   of data delivered by multicast have been proposed over the years.

   *  TESLA [RFC4082] achieves asymmetry between the sender and multiple
      receivers through timed release of symmetric keying material
      rather than through the computational difficulty of deriving a
      signing key from a verification key in public key cryptosystems
      like RSA and ECDSA.  It employs computationally-inexpensive
      symmetric authentication tagging with release of the keying
      material to receivers only after they are assumed to have received
      the protected data, with any data received subsequent to key
      release to be discarded.  This requires some degree of time
      synchronization between clients and servers and imposes latency
      above one-way path delay prior to release of authenticated data to
      applications.

   *  Simple per-packet asymmetric signature of packet contents based on
      out-of-band communication of the signature's public key and
      algorithm, for example as described in Section 3 of [RFC6584].

   *  Asymmetric Manifest-based Integrity (AMBI) [AMBI] relies on an
      out-of-band authenticated channel for distribution of manifests
      containing cryptographic digests of the packets in the multicast
      stream.  Authentication of this channel may, for instance, be
      provided by TLS if manifests are distributed using HTTPS from an
      origin known to the client to be closely affiliated with the
      multicast stream, such as would be the case if the manifest URL is
      delivered by the origin of the parent page hosting the media
      object.  Authenticity in this case is a prerequisite of the out-
      of-band channel that AMBI builds upon to provide authenticity for
      the multicast data channel.

   Regardless of mechanism, the primary goal of authentication in the
   multicast context is identical to that for unicast: that the content
   delivered to the application originated from the trusted source.
   Semantic equivalence to (D)TLS in this respect is therefore
   straightforwardly achieved by any number of potential mechanisms.

4.1.2.  Beyond Authentication Tagging

   Integrity is partially provided by the authentication mechanism.  As
   multicast is not connection-oriented at the transport layer (e.g.,
   multicast protocols typically employ UDP), applications relying on
   multicast must otherwise provide for detection and/or management of
   packet duplication/replay, loss/deletion, and reordering.

   Some of these functions may also be provided by the authentication
   mechanism.  For instance:

   *  TESLA prevents replay and reveals reordering, but only across time
      intervals.  An application requiring finer-grained countermeasures
      against duplication/replay or reordering, or indeed any
      countermeasure to deletion/loss, would need to provide that via
      custom support (e.g., through the introduction of packet sequence
      numbers) or via an intermediate-layer protocol providing those
      functions.

   *  AMBI by design provides strong protection against duplication/
      replay and reveals reordering and deletion/loss of content packets
      through a strict in-order manifest of packet digests.

4.2.  Confidentiality

   In the unicast transport security context, confidentiality implies
   that an observer (passive or active) without pre-existing access to
   keying material must not be able to decrypt the bytes on the wire or
   identify the content being transferred, even if that adversary has
   access to the decrypted content via other means.  In practice, the
   former is trivially achieved through the use of authenticated key
   exchange and modern symmetric ciphers, but the latter is an ideal
   that is rarely possible owing to the substantial metadata in the
   clear on the public Internet: traffic analysis can make use of packet
   sizes and timing, endpoint identities, biases in application-layer
   protocol designs, side channels, and other such metadata to reveal an
   often surprising amount of information about the encrypted payload
   without needing access to any keying material.

   Multicast additionally introduces the complication that all receivers
   of a stream, even if encrypted, receive the same payload (loss and
   duplication notwithstanding).  This introduces novel privacy concerns
   that do not apply to unicast transports.

4.2.1.  Privacy

   In contrast to (say) unicast TLS, on-path monitoring can trivially
   prove that identical content was delivered to multiple receivers,
   irrespective of payload encryption.  Furthermore, since those
   receivers all require the same keying material to decrypt the
   received payload, a compromise of any single receiver's device
   exposes decryption keys, and therefore the plaintext content, to the
   attacker.

   That having been said, however, there are factors and practices that
   help mitigate these additional risks:

   *  Multicast delivery is unidirectional from content provider to
      consumer and has no end-to-end unicast control channel association
      at the transport-layer, though such associations are possible and
      even likely at the application layer.  Assuming application-layer
      unicast control plane traffic is properly-secured, identifiable
      plaintext control messages are limited to IGMP or MLD messages
      intercepted by (and not retransmitted verbatim by) a user's
      upstream router.  Notwithstanding linkability via data or metadata
      from application-layer control flows, a passive observer with
      monitoring capability at a particular path element can thus only
      directly determine that some entity served by that path element
      has joined a particular multicast channel (in SSM [RFC4607],
      identified by the (source, group) pair of IP addresses).
      Increasing the specificity of user identification would require a
      monitoring point closer to the user or some way to manipulate a
      user into revealing metadata out-of-band that the observer can tie
      to the user via traffic analysis or other means.

   *  There is in general no way to link a multicast channel to other
      related content: in particular, if a multicast stream is encrypted
      using a key delivered out-of-band, there is no standard mechanism
      in the multicast protocol ecosystem for identifying the location
      of the keying material.  Thus, for a passive observer to know what
      content is actually being consumed, beyond simply identifying the
      multicast channel or metadata such as the cohort of possible group
      members revealed by tracking channel membership at the observer's
      set of network tap points, they would need to already know what
      content is available via that channel, either via traffic analysis
      such as in the case of passive observation of unicast TLS, or via
      access to the related content that references the channel.  TODO:
      This explanation needs to be made comprehensible.  A dragnet
      cataloging all content available through a particular origin would
      defeat this, but could be further mitigated via controlled access
      to index information, or via periodic changes in multicast source,
      group, or keying material or some combination of the three.

   *  As covered in Section 4.2.2, multicast is not generally suitable
      for transport of personal data: consequently, while the attack
      surface of a pool of receivers increases with the number of
      receivers, the corresponding impact of a compromise goes down as
      more broadly-distributed content is less likely to contain
      revelatory information.  TODO: This doesn't account for the
      dissidents-watching-a-prohibited-stream scenario.

4.2.2.  Personal Data

   A sender has responsibility not to expose personal information
   broadly.  This is not a consideration unique to multicast delivery:
   an irresponsible service could publish a web page with Social
   Security numbers or push its server TLS private key into the
   certificate transparency log as easily as it could multicast personal
   data to a large set of receivers.

   The Web security model partially mitigates irresponsible senders by
   mandating the use of secure transports: prohibiting the fetching of
   mixed content on a single page prevents a server from sending private
   data to a browser in the clear.  The main effect is to raise the bar
   closer to requiring bad faith on the part of senders in revealing
   personal information.

   Multicast by its very nature is not generally suitable for transport
   of personal data: since the main value of leveraging a multicast
   transport is to deliver the same data to a large pool of receivers,
   such content must not include confidential personal information.
   Senders already have a responsibility to handle private information
   in a way that respects the privacy of users: the availability of
   multicast transports does not further complicate this responsibility.

4.2.3.  Forward Secrecy

   TODO: Confidentiality of past payloads, e.g. via key rotation.

4.3.  Non-linkability

   TODO: Re: passively linking a user across user agents or roaming
   devices.

4.4.  Browser-Specific Threats

   The security requirements for multicast transport to a browser follow
   directly from the requirement that the browser's job is to protect
   the user.  Huang et al. [huang-w2sp] summarize the core browser
   security guarantee as follows:

   Users can safely visit arbitrary web sites and execute scripts
   provided by those sites.

   The reader will find the full discussion of the browser threat model
   in section 3 of [RFC8826] helpful in understanding what follows.

4.4.1.  Access to Local Resources

   This document covers only unidirectional multicast from a server to
   (potentially many) clients, as well as associated control channels
   used to manage that communication and access to the content delivered
   via multicast.  As a result, local resource access can be presumed to
   be limited to that already available within web applications.  Note
   that these resources may include information that can be used to
   identify or track individuals, such as information about the user
   agent, viewport size, display resolution, but TODO: reference some
   other guidance on how this kind of PII is to be handled.

4.4.2.  Injection

4.4.3.  Hostile Origin

5.  Security Considerations

   This entire document is about security.

6.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC3552]  Rescorla, E. and B. Korver, "Guidelines for Writing RFC
              Text on Security Considerations", BCP 72, RFC 3552,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC3552, July 2003,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3552>.

   [RFC4607]  Holbrook, H. and B. Cain, "Source-Specific Multicast for
              IP", RFC 4607, DOI 10.17487/RFC4607, August 2006,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4607>.

   [RFC8085]  Eggert, L., Fairhurst, G., and G. Shepherd, "UDP Usage
              Guidelines", BCP 145, RFC 8085, DOI 10.17487/RFC8085,
              March 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8085>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

   [RFC8815]  Abrahamsson, M., Chown, T., Giuliano, L., and T. Eckert,
              "Deprecating Any-Source Multicast (ASM) for Interdomain
              Multicast", BCP 229, RFC 8815, DOI 10.17487/RFC8815,
              August 2020, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8815>.

7.2.  Informative References

   [AMBI]     Holland, J. and K. Rose, "Asymmetric Manifest Based
              Integrity", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-
              mboned-ambi-02, 11 July 2021,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-mboned-
              ambi-02>.

   [huang-w2sp]
              Huang, L-S., Chen, E.Y., Barth, A., Rescorla, E., and C.
              Jackson, "Talking to Yourself for Fun and Profit", Web 2.0
              Security and Privacy (W2SP 2011) , May 2011,
              <https://ptolemy.berkeley.edu/projects/truststc/pubs/840/
              websocket.pdf>.

   [RFC4082]  Perrig, A., Song, D., Canetti, R., Tygar, J. D., and B.
              Briscoe, "Timed Efficient Stream Loss-Tolerant
              Authentication (TESLA): Multicast Source Authentication
              Transform Introduction", RFC 4082, DOI 10.17487/RFC4082,
              June 2005, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4082>.

   [RFC6584]  Roca, V., "Simple Authentication Schemes for the
              Asynchronous Layered Coding (ALC) and NACK-Oriented
              Reliable Multicast (NORM) Protocols", RFC 6584,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6584, April 2012,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6584>.

   [RFC8446]  Rescorla, E., "The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol
              Version 1.3", RFC 8446, DOI 10.17487/RFC8446, August 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8446>.

   [RFC8826]  Rescorla, E., "Security Considerations for WebRTC",
              RFC 8826, DOI 10.17487/RFC8826, January 2021,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8826>.

   [webtrans] Vasiliev, V., "The WebTransport Protocol Framework", Work
              in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-webtrans-overview-
              02, 28 July 2021, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/
              draft-ietf-webtrans-overview-02>.

Acknowledgments

   TODO acks

Authors' Addresses

   Kyle Rose
   Akamai Technologies, Inc.
   145 Broadway
   Cambridge, MA 02144,
   United States of America

   Email: krose@krose.org


   Jake Holland
   Akamai Technologies, Inc.
   145 Broadway
   Cambridge, MA 02144,
   United States of America

   Email: jakeholland.net@gmail.com
